IBS Spatial Phylogenetics Workshop
Biodiverse Session
2022_10_11
Instructor: Kyle Rosenblad - kyle_rosenblad@berkeley.edu



Cloning the workshop repository:
Welcome! First we'll clone the Github repository for this workshop using RStudio--i.e., download it to a
directory on your computer that will now have the same structure and contents as the repository on Github.
To clone the repository, first open it on Github:
https://github.com/matthewkling/ibs-spatial-phylogenetics-2022

Click the green "Code" button, and then click the button with two overlapping squares to the right of
the field showing the URL.

Now open RStudio. In the File menu, click New Project, then Version Control, then Git. Paste in the
repository URL and choose a directory to store it on your computer. We're ready to go!


Data sets in the repository:
The repository contains four data sets. We'll be using two of them for the Biodiverse portion of the
workshop: one on Australian Acacia plants (Mishler et al. 2014) and one on California vascular plants
(Thornhill et al. 2017).



Ingredients for spatial phylogenetics:
An analysis requires two ingredients: 1- data on the spatial occurrences of the organisms of interest
and 2- a phylogeny.



Types of spatial data:
The spatial data can take various forms. Often we'll have a set of point occurrences like we might get
from GBIF, or we might have modeled species ranges from an SDM analysis, or perhaps a raster of
presence/absence or abundance data. Similarly, we might have presence/absence or abundance data for
irregular polygons instead of a raster grid. The two data sets we'll use in Biodiverse contain point
occurrences for the spatial component. I'll briefly show what this looks like in Excel now before we
explore it in more detail using Biodiverse.



Types of phylogenies:
Phylogenetic relationships can also be represented in various ways. The branch lengths can be scaled to
represent the expected number of changes between ancestor and descendant for the characters used to build
the phylogeny (often DNA sequences), in which case we call the tree a phylogram. Alternatively, the branch
lengths might be calibrated to represent the amount of time separating ancestor from descendant, in which
case we call the tree a chronogram. Lastly, sometimes we are interested in the number of speciation events
across different parts of the tree, in which case we make all the branch lengths equal and refer to the
tree as a cladogram. We can do spatial phylogenetics with each of these three types of trees, and doing so
reveals different facets of phylodiversity.

The two data sets we'll use today both contain phylograms. Biodiverse has a handy function for converting
to a cladogram, which I'll demonstrate later.



Goals for Biodiverse session:
We won’t have time today to cover all of the many things it’s possible to do in Biodiverse, so over the
course of our session, I’ll point out several online resources that may prove useful when you’re using
Biodiverse on your own in the future. These resources are linked here where relevant. My goal for today
is to give you a strong foundation so you can go off on your own and change the details of what we do 
to suit your own data and questions.



Warning for Mac users:
As of today, Biodiverse is unfortunately only maintained for Windows. If you're a Mac user, you
might only encounter small bugs, or you may find the program unusable, depending on your particular machine
and operating system. We will unfortunately not be able to troubleshoot Mac issues today. If you're a
Windows user and you encounter an error, please try using the Zoom hand raise function or typing a message
in the chat, but if none of the instructors see this promptly, please go ahead and jump in with your
question or issue. If others are having the same problem, we'll troubleshoot as a group. If it's a unique
issue, Israel or Matt will go to a breakout room with you.



Opening Biodiverse:
Go to the directory where you installed Biodiverse and open the BiodiverseGUI executable. If you don't
remember specifying where to install Biodiverse, it probably wound up in your Downloads folder. Feel
free to move the whole Biodiverse directory somewhere else if you'd like.



Biodiverse's interface:
Let’s take a moment to walk through the big picture organization of the interface. As we discussed earlier,
spatial phylogenetics has two ingredients: a phylogeny and a set of taxon occurrences or abundances in
space. This two-ingredient recipe is reflected in the layout of the Biodiverse interface. “Basedata”,
which we see on a dropdown menu and a toolbar, refers to spatial occurrence data. “Trees”, which we also
see on both a dropdown menu and a toolbar, refers to the phylogeny. There’s a third option, “Matrices”,
which is not a necessary ingredient of a phylogenetic analysis and is less commonly used, but might be
convenient in some scenarios. Today we'll focus on the essentials using Basedata and Trees.



Loading the Mishler et al. (2014) Acacia occurrence data:
To load the Basedata, click the blue plus sign on the Basedata toolbar. Navigate to the directory where
you cloned the workshop repository from Github, open the "data" folder, then "mishler_2014". Biodiverse
is automatically showing us .txt and .csv files, two formats commonly used for data in table format.
Select "mishler_2014_acacia_points.csv" and click Next.

Now we're looking at the Import options settings. Allowing labels with no groups, or empty groups, is not
necessary but wouldn't hurt. Clicking these is helpful when you have taxa that appear only in the tree or
only in the spatial data, but we don't need to worry about that for this data set. We'll learn more about
what "groups" and "labels" mean soon. Our data are not in matrix form (rows for taxa and columns for sites,
or vice versa), so we won't click that option. Biodiverse is good at guessing input separators (commas for
a csv), so we can leave that on that default "guess". 7 decimal places will be plenty for cell sizes.
Now click Next.

Now we have to tell Biodiverse what to do with each of the columns in our csv. As we see here, the default
is simply to ignore. We have to choose the columns that we want to inform our analyses. The two key
options for us on the dropdown menus are "Label" and "Group". In Biodiverse parlance, taxa are represented
by "Labels", and geography is represented by "Groups". As such, let's use the "taxa" field for our "Labels".
(In this data set, pretty much each taxon is a species, so we could essentially equivalently use "Species"
as our Label, but I want to emphasize that you can do spatial phylogenetics without any special regard
for the species level of the taxonomic hierarchy.) We'll use the x and y Equal Albers variables for our
"Groups". We could also use latitude and longitude, but many people find it helpful to use a projected
coordinate reference system that gives us grid cells of equal size. (We would have unequally sized cells if
we used lat/lon.) 

Now we need to choose our geographic grid resolution. This question is a good one to think hard about.
Our decision might depend on data quality, putative completeness of range sampling, computing
requirements, or other factors. To reproduce Mishler et al.'s (2014) results, let's change the default
100 km (i.e., 100,000 meters) to 50km. Our data are not in degrees, so we won't change those fields. Click
OK.

We don't need to reorder the columns to get the correct x-y order, but if we did, we could click the
column names and use the up/down buttons. Click OK.

We don't need to remap label names. This is something we do if we're worried there
might be typos, formatting differences, or other mismatches between the taxon names in our tree and the
occurrence data we just loaded.

The data are loaded! Let's click "Show" on the right to see some nice visual and tabular summaries.

Click the first taxon, abbreviata, in the table in the top left. "Variety" shows us how many grid cells
are occupied by this taxon (6), and the cells are highlighted in red on the map below. "Samples" tells
us how many point occurrences this taxon has in the data set, and the "Redundancy" value tells us that
about 91% of them are redundant--i.e., occurring in a grid cell that is already "covered" by another
point occurrence of the same taxon. Take a moment to scroll through, highlight a few more taxon names,
and view a few more ranges.



Loading the Mishler et al. (2014) Acacia phylogeny:
To load the Tree, click the blue plus sign on the Tree toolbar. Our data are not in tabular format, nor
are most phylogenies you'd build or download. (They're usually .nex, .new, .tre, or .phy, none of which
are tabular.) Navigate to the mishler_2014 folder again, select "mishler_2014_acacia.tre", and click OK.

We don't need to show details or remap node names. (Remapping is again referring to the problem of typos
or otherwise mismatched taxon names between Tree and Basedata.)

The tree is loaded! It's a phylogram, so branch lengths represent the expected amount of molecular change
between ancestor and descendant. (The tree was built from DNA data.) We can view it in the bottom right.

***Exercise: Try hovering over a few tips on the phylogeny. What do you think is happening on the map?

***Exercise: Try hovering over some deeper branches on the tree. Now what's happening on the map?



Saving the project:
Now that we've done some work, let's save the project by opening the File menu and clicking "Save
Project As". For convenience and consistency, let's put it within the same mishler_2014 directory and call
it mishler_2014_biodiverse_analysis.



Richness analysis:
For our first spatial analysis, we'll map a familiar non-phylogenetic measure of "alpha" diversity in
each grid cell: "taxon" richness, which in our case equates to species richness. Open the Analyses
dropdown and click Spatial.

First we have the option to name our analysis. The default seems mostly fine, but let's make it more
informative by changing "Spatial0" to "richness". In this case, the defaults are fine for the two
neighbor sets.

For most alpha diversity measures (i.e., measures that quantify biodiversity in a single
grid cell), there is no need to specify anything for Neighborhood 2. (The lines of code preceded by # are
comments, which do not affect the analysis, just like in R.) The sp_self_only() value for Neighborhood 1
simply specifies that we only want the algorithm to look at the taxa within each cell when calculating the
values for that cell. 

Now we have to actually tell Biodiverse what biodiversity metric we want to calculate (i.e., species
richness.) There are many different metrics to choose from, and they're organized hierarchically into
categories. Richness is under "Lists and Counts". Choose "Richness", click "Go", wait for the analysis to
finish (this should be just a few seconds), and then click "Yes" for "display results". 

We now have a new tab showing our richness results! Take a moment to look at the patterns.

Across the bottom, second from the left, there's a popup menu that currently says "RICHNESS_ALL". Perhaps
unsurprisingly, this is the official Biodiverse name for the metric you and I would probably just call
species richness (or taxon richness). However, maybe we might look back at this in a while and be 
uncertain as to what this means, or maybe we would be confused by the fact that there are actually three
options on this menu, two of which are identical, and one of which is a map full of zeros. What is going
on here? Let's go to Shawn Laffan's Biodiverse help wiki:

https://github.com/shawnlaffan/biodiverse/wiki/

... which has a page on the names of all the different biodiversity indices we can calculate:

https://github.com/shawnlaffan/biodiverse/wiki/Indices

The choices are structured in the same way we saw in the panel we used to set up our analysis. Navigate
to "Richness".

Ahah! We have an explanation of the formula: counting the number of labels--i.e. taxa--in the neighbor
sets. Sounds like species richness! But what's this about Neighbor Sets? Oh, right, we had the option to
specify two, but we only used the first one. So this makes sense then; we're getting species richness for
neighbor set 1, and nothing for neighbor set 2, because we didn't specify a neighbor set 2.



Endemism analysis:
Let's try one more non-phylogenetic alpha diversity measure as we build conceptually toward incorporating
the phylogeny.

***Exercise: The metric we want is called "Endemism whole". See if you can find it in the spatial analysis
options. We do not need to specify a Neighborhood 2 for this metric. It's akin to species richness, except we 
are weighting each species' contribution to the total sum by the reciprocal of its range size across
the whole study domain (i.e., Australia). Some other versions of endemism restrict the geographic
space for the range size values that are used in the reciprocal weights, thus necessitating a
Neighborhood 2 specification, which creates a moving window around each focal grid cell. This approach is
less commonly used.

Let's look at the results.

***Exercise: We've got four Indices to choose from in the output. What does each one mean?

As the last Exercise demonstrated, Biodiverse often outputs multiple indices, even when we only tell it
to calculate one. Why does it do this? Often the indices are calculated by taking the ratio (or difference,
or other operations) of other indices, and it might be informative to see visualizations of these other
indices.

Let's keep this species-based endemism concept in the back of our minds for later when we start looking
at phylogenetic endemism.



Phylogenetic diversity and endemism:
Now let's start using the phylogeny in our analyses. This time we'll tell Biodiverse to calculate two
indices in a single analysis: Phylogenetic diversity (PD) and Phylogenetic endemism (PE_WE, also known
sometimes as just PE). (WE stands for weighted endemism.) These indices are nice conceptual
analogs to the non-phylogenetic indices we calculated earlier. Phylogenetic diversity is the sum of the
branch lengths connecting the taxa that occur in each grid cell. Phylogenetic endemism is similar, except
the contribution of each branch to the sum is weighted by the reciprocal of that branch's range size.

***Exercise: see if you can find and run these two metrics.

Let's look at the PD results first.

***Exercise: What is noteworthy about the Acacia assemblages found in southwestern Australia? Why do they
have exceptionally high PD despite having only modestly high species richness?

Now let's compare phylogenetic endemism (PE_WE) to the species-based endemism index we calculated earlier.
There are some similar geographic patterns broadly speaking, but there are also some striking differences.
Let's focus on the two grid cells with very high PE_WE at the southeastern edge of the Cape York
Peninsula. 

***Exercise: Do these grid cells have a species found on a particularly long branch of the phylogeny?
If so, what size is this species' range? What does all this tell us about the attributes of taxa we
find in assemblages with high PE?



Facets of phylodiversity and switching from phylogram to cladogram:
As we discussed earlier, there are three basic types of phylogenies. So far, we've been using a phylogram,
in which branch lengths represent the expected amount of molecular evolution between ancestor and
descendant. Let's now explore using a cladogram, in which branch lengths are equalized.

Open the Trees dropdown menu at the top and click "convert to equalized branch lengths". (Also note that
"Import" provides an alternative to the blue plus sign on the Tree toolbar.) If you don't like the
default name, you can enter your own alternative. Once you've made the new tree, open the tab on the left
that shows our basedata and tree. Make sure the new tree is selected in the "Tree" Toolbar and look at
the structure of the new tree.

Now let's re-run the PD and PE calculations with the cladogram.

***Exercise: try running this analysis on your own. Do the results differ compared to phylogram-derived
PD and PE? How about compared to species richness and species-based endemism?



Relative Phylogenetic Diversity and Endemism:
So far, most of the statements we've made about "high" and "low" phylogenetic diversity or endemism have
been direct comparisons among grid cells within this data set. Depending on your questions or hypotheses,
this may or may not be a suitable approach. An alternative is to take PD or PE derived from a phylogram
(or chronogram), in which branch lengths vary, and divide this value by cladogram-derived PD or PE for
that same grid cell. We call these indices Relative Phylogenetic Diversity (RPD) and Relative
Phylogenetic Endemism. These values are high when the focal grid cell has a preponderance of taxa on long
branches and low when there is a preponderance of taxa on short branches.

***Exercise: try running these analyses on your own. Remember to use the Tree toolbar to switch back to
the phylogram (instead of the cladogram) before running. What do you think would happen if we forgot to
switch?



Randomization and CANAPE:
There's another step we can take to compare phylogenetic diversity and endemism in a different way--one
that is more directly comparable among studies and data sets. This approach involves using null model
randomization algorithms to compare the observed patterns to the null distribution we get by reshuffling
the data according to a chosen set of rules. Usually the approach is to reshuffle the taxon occurrences
randomly while maintaining the observed species richness values. For each grid cell, we can then generate
a p-value, which is the percentile rank of the observed value of PD for the true date (or PE, RPD, RPE,
etc.) compared to the 999 (or however many) values for that grid cell in the randomly generated data sets.
These p-values can then be used to identify grid cells with significantly high or low values of our chosen
diversity metric.

The null model randomization approach has been particularly fruitful in developing quantitative tests for
neo- and paleoendemism. A hotspot of neoendemism should contain many recently diverged lineages (i.e.,
found on short branches) that have small ranges, whereas a hotspot of paleoendemism should have many
distantly diverged lineages (i.e., found on long branches) that have small ranges.

The CANAPE approach, which focuses on RPE, allows us to identify such hotspots using quantitative criteria
in a two-step grid cell selection process. As we learned above, RPE is the ratio of phylogram-derived PE
(or chronogram-derived PE) to cladogram-derived PE. Because this index is a ratio, it is possible to get
exceptionally high or low values for the overall ratio when neither the numerator or denominator is
exceptionally high. Since it doesn't make sense to consider this type of grid cell a center of endemism
(be it neo- or paleo-), the first step of the CANAPE process is to filter down to only grid cells with
significantly high values for the numerator of RPE, the denominator, or both. The second step is to then
test for sigificantly high RPE (paleoendemism) or low RPE (neoendemism) in the remaining subset.

Let's now walk through how generate these results in Biodiverse.

***Exercise: First we need to run a new analysis for RPE. Try finding and running this on your own.

Next we need to run the randomization. Open the Analyses dropdown menu and click Randomisation. Almost
all of the defaults match what we want. The rand_structured function shuffles taxon occurrences while
maintaining species richness, which is what we want. 1 iteration isn't enough for a null distribution,
so let's increase it to 19. Something more like 999 is typical for published analyses, but we don't want
this to take too long. The rest of the defaults are fine, and unless you're doing a fairly unusual analysis
in the future, you'll rarely if ever need to touch these. Click "Randomise" and wait a couple of minutes
for the 19 runs to complete. It will randomize the data and recalculate all of the indices we've calculated
previously, still visible in the tabs to the left of the current one.

Let's now look through the CANAPE-relevant results. Step one is to find cells that are significant (given
some threshold) for the numerator of RPE (phylogram-derived PE) or the denominator (cladogram-derived PE,
also known in Biodiverse as PHYLO_RPE_NULL2). By default, Biodiverse applies a two-tailed threshold of 0.05,
so the top and bottom 2.5 % of values are deemed significant and shown in red and blue. We can switch to
viewing the p-values using the leftmost popup menu on the bottom.

For the second phase of CANAPE, we would look at the RPE values themselves, but only within the set of
grid cells deemed significant in step 1.

Biodiverse is primarily a tool for generating values for spatial phylogenetics metrics and exporting them
for use with other programs (like R) that provide functionality in statistics, data visualization, etc.
Tomorrow Matt will give an extensive session on using R for spatial phylogenetics, so we will stop today's
content at the point of exporting our results, so keep in mind that the skills you learn tomorrow can be
used either to do spatial phylogenetics from scratch, or to pick up where we are leaving off here in
Biodiverse.

Let's look at options for exporting our results files using the Export button on the left.



Additional topics we may explore if there's extra time:
-Community phylogenetics metrics (e.g. mean nearest taxon distance, mean pairwise distance)
-Phylogenetic beta diversity
-Phylogenetic cluster analysis